Give them a chance to get promoted in.
Um, Anna, do we have, uh,
someone lined up?
Ready? Oh, welcome, Roger, turn on your,
if you can turn on your camera and unmute
and, um, fantastic.
We can see you there. There we go. Fantastic. Welcome.
Um, we've got the next sort of nine
or 10 minutes for you, so, um, I'll, I'll let you go first,
but you might like to leave some time for questions.
I'll let you know when there's a minute left to run. Thank
You and welcome all,
and thank you for allowing me to speak.
My name is Roger. I'm Disability Dogs Advocate
for Civil Defense New Zealand Disability.
Cis dogs attacks are not mandatory at the moment.
We would like to see this come mandatory
for all service dogs of the eight organization.
We have the, um,
disabilities Assist Docs was not registered at one
of the floodings in New Zealand,
and we were trying to approve on this
so we can support other people in this little mistake
that's been happen where pet docs
and fake service docs are getting more rights than
the assistance dogs.
We need to make this a bit more clearer in our Civil Defense
emergency management team as it's coming more
arising of fake service dogs,
the identification tags we're pushing for the $3,000,
um, if they are breaking the law,
and that needs to come under the Emergency
Management Act as well.
Um, the Disability Assist Dogs,
it can be deployed anywhere in the Civil Defense emergency
right throughout New Zealand.
It comes if we need it
so we can support these service docs.
What we have been doing in Wellington with,
with Civil Defense for the disability sector
and for the assistance docs.
There is a link there that, um, is
provided for you to have a read off,
or if you haven't already seen it, I'm quite, um, pleased
to be one of the support person who been accepted
to do this work for our New Zealanders,
The PEs, the PCEP workbook,
um, for the disability emergency Management for
of the whole world, it's very important
that we understand it, the stakeholders
for the civil defense, um, including the Social Minister
of Disability, social Worker, um, wins
and other accommodation, uh, people with their disability,
dogs, New Zealand Sign Language,
and any other providers of New Zealand.
What we're focusing on is to be approached
and be more helpful for all us in need, what we need
for the disability site
so we, none of us can be left out and be left in the dark.
Thank you very much for your time.
Oh, thank you, Roger. Um, fantastic to hear from you.
I'm just looking around to see if there are any questions.
Um, Andy Foster.
Yeah, look. Um, thanks Roger.
Um, I'm just not quite, quite clear
What can got your hand down please, so I can
read your lip. Oh,
Sorry. I, I'm not quite
clear what it is
that the Lord doesn't provide for at the moment
and what you're asking for.
Under the Dog Control Act, it is very clear under
Schedule five and that sort of stuff,
there is the eight organizations listed, um,
also under the specification B um, under the Civil Defense.
Um, that's also in their dog control as well.
So, um, if there is an emergency that we need to be evac,
people need to be evacuated.
Yeah. Um, especially if they have service dogs
that we can come in
and to assist those people, um, in need.
Um, I know we can't be all over the place in one area,
but we trying to help the civil defense management team
to support these people with service dogs.
Um, pet dogs are being put with service dogs.
Um, a lot of us, we need our quiet and,
and closed space, um,
in an event of emergency.
Um, yeah, there's so many service dogs have been rushed at
and attacked in New Zealand.
It is quite shocking and alarming.
Um, and people just don't realize.
So, so is this a situation where we've, people have got
to be evacuated and the dog
and you are saying the dog service dog needs to go with, um,
With the person, with the human,
That that's the key. That's
the key point, isn't it?
That's the key point. Yes. Where,
Whereas if it's a pet dog, you wouldn't, um,
necessarily do, uh, take the, uh, the dog with the human
If the dog has to go with the human, um, a pet dog
or, or service dogs.
What we're asking for is we have, we're allowed
inside the ev evacuation center, a lot of us have been left
outside and some of us have not been recorded in,
in an event of emergency.
'cause it's too much chaos. Um,
and that's the area there we need to be improving on.
Okay. Um, okay. Thanks. Thanks Roger.
And we really appreciate your submission
and thanks for taking the time, um,
to speak to us this morning.
Um, we're gonna move on to our next submission now,
which will be Jasmine Taylor and I believe she's online.
She's just getting, um, moved into the room.
Jasmine, you are free to turn on your camera and unmute,
and we will give you the next, um, sort of 10 minutes
and I'll let you know when there's a minute to run,
but you might like to leave some time for questions.
Oh, can you hear us there, Jasmine? All right. Okay.
All yours?
Uh, yes I can. Thank you.
Uh, thank you very much for the time.
Thank you very much for this opportunity to come along
and present to you today.
Uh, my name is Jasmine Taylor.
I currently reside in,
and I'm here to talk about
how we can strengthen emergency management protocols.
I would like to see us make sure
that we are acknowledging the role
of the treaty in emergency management.
That that treaty does have some obligations
that we should be considering.
We do need to ensure that it also takes account
of the UN RCPD, the United
United Nations Convention on the Rights, people
with disabilities and the commitments
that sit within that document.
We also need a clearer definition of the kinds
of communities that are affected at these times,
particularly in emergencies.
When we are planning for emergencies,
we must consider the coordination that is required,
the discussions that are required.
When we are considering how we support
and protect deaf and disabled people.
It's, we must ensure that those rights
and the needs of these communities are met
during times of emergency.
So, for example, that may mean access to information
and not just things that are freely accessed,
but things that are accessed by the wider community.
Those communities also need
that information in times of need.
For example, with the deaf community,
we may need more resources, uh, um,
intentionally made accessible
through New Zealand sign language so
that deaf people have access to those resources
and to the supports that may come with them.
We also need support after an emergency with civil defense.
Many of our people may need particular access considerations
when it comes to accessing emergency accommodation,
emergency services, emergency centers.
We know that in our communities, the deaf
and disabled community, our people tend to be disadvantaged
socioeconomically compared to wider populations.
And we know that this has cascading effects
on people's access to all sorts of things,
but particular in times of dire emergency.
Our communities often are left to fend for themselves
and not, are not always able to cope,
and we don't have the same options as other communities.
And I feel that this is a concern in terms of human rights.
And I'd like this bill to specifically mention,
to specifically highlight these communities
and have clear definitions about,
Uh, how they can be identified and supported
Media.
For example, I think it ought to be enshrined in the law
that during media, um, campaigns
that interpreters ought to be used, that should be front
and center, so that we know that they will be there.
Sometimes TV broadcasters don't show the interpreters fully
or clearly during times of emergency,
and that means that deaf people will have to wait to see
the information or try and find it in another way.
Judge, As I mentioned earlier,
I live down here in Dunedin
and I'm lucky to live here in South Dunedin.
But of course, this is an area that's prone to floods.
And so when local emergency management teams
are pulling together their resources
and their plans, they have considered,
they have given some, some consideration to how they work
with deaf communities and how they provide access
through silent interpreters.
How they have information translated
or interpreted live as needed.
What this means is that
I know what's going on during an emergency.
Typically I know what to do
because I have access to the information they are prepared,
which means I can be prepared.
And I'm hoping that they will continue
with their future planning to take, um, note of these kinds
of, uh, concerns and considerations.
Um, but I'm hoping that
that will help influence change across the country in terms
of access during emergencies.
We need the resources and deaf
and disabled communities need to be
fully included in plans as other citizens are.
They need access to the information they need to be able
to understand the information, um, so that that
emergency support and planning
happens when it needs to happen.
We need those communities one, one
Minute, Alan, But they have the same opportunities
as other people
when it comes to thinking, do I stay
or do I go, what are my options in terms of access
to transport if I do have to go?
These are the kinds of issues that have to be thought about,
and we need some way for these considerations
to be enshrined in this bill.
Thank you for the time.
Thank you, Jasmine.
We appreciate your, um, submissions today.
And I think you've articulated very clearly the perspective
of deaf people, particularly your point about mandatory
sign interpretation.
Um, so just, we, we are out of time for questions,
but I wanted to thank you for your submission.
Yeah, you're welcome. Um, we're going to move
to Judy Lawrence so I can see online.
So please feel free to turn on your camera,
Judy, and unmute.
Um, we have five minutes for your submission.
You might like to leave some time for questions,
but I'll let you know when there's a minute to run.
It's all yours.
Good morning. Can you see me and hear?
Yes, we can. Yes. Thank you.
Well, thank you very much for the opportunity to present.
I'm doing this on as, um, three of three colleagues,
myself and Rob, Dr.
Rob Berlin and Dr. Benjamin Tombs,
who have been working on collectively on adaptation
and climate change and the link between, uh,
disaster management, emergency management, um, adaptation
and hazard management for many years.
But what we'd like to focus on is a very particular aspect
of this, um, bill.
And in looking at the legislative alignment across the
siloed activities of emergency management,
natural hazard management, risk reduction,
and climate change adaptation, it's become very important
that these legisl, these bits
of legislation all talk to each other.
We have a wonderful opportunity with this bill, the planning
and natural, um, environment bill being considered
by the house at the moment.
And, um, government's intention to, um,
reform the, um, climate Change Response Act for adaptation.
And we have submitted to both a planning bill
and just bill, um, to highlight this urgent need for,
um, ways in which repeat flood disasters
and the under, under attention
to risk reduction can be addressed.
Now, this one is the first off the block, um,
and there, uh, is absolutely no reference in this bill
to the exacerbation of, um,
floods r from Rivers and storms and coastal flooding, um,
and the acceleration from climate change.
And what we are asking is
that there be some mechanism in this bill that can talk
to the planning bill and the Climate Change Response Act,
and particularly with respect to the recovery component
of the C dm.
Um, part of this bill, um, cabinet had, um,
in October identified that, um,
this link should be made.
And I expect that that will be made through the adaptation,
um, framework and the amendments to the CCRA,
but to have a hook already in the emergency management bill
because there's no certainty the other legislation will
go through this session.
Um, and this is an opportunity to do that.
So what we're really, um, just in conclusion wanting
to highlight is that we want to break, see the cycle broken
of avoiding rebuilding and perpetuating risk and,
and also identifying that there are limits to protection.
Um, and that land use change is also going to be required.
So, um, that's really the submission we are making.
It's a very particular point, which
probably others may not make.
So we wanted to take the opportunity
and I'm happy to take questions.
Thanks, Dr. Lawrence. We've got, um,
just over a minute left, so I'll hand over
to Andy Foster first.
Uh, thanks Judy. Really appreciate that comment.
'cause it's one I've, um, I've made several times
to both the minister and, uh, and to Nima.
Um, is there a, a shot throughout the bill?
There's a whole lot of very general statements about the
importance of, um, of planning around, um,
risk, uh, reduction.
Um, but there's nothing specific there.
Is that the area you'd like us
to basically put specific responsibilities on the likes
of NEMA on councils in terms of their emergency management?
Um, yes, absolutely. Responsibilities
to actually do something in terms
of the risk reduction right up front.
Yep. Yep. Putting the risk reduction right up front so
that we don't have decisions being made in the rush,
in the hurry of a, of an emergency.
And those decisions being regretted later,
they may be in the wrong place, putting people back
where they shouldn't be, um, and so forth.
So it's a hook that if there was something
maybe in the purpose and also some places throughout
the, um, the bill.
Um, and so you would you like to see, um, the likes
of nema, the likes of council's, emergency management,
people getting involved in planning decisions, um, you know,
district plan developments and so on.
Say, look, actually the advice we've got,
the information we've got is don't build in
that particular location or in
that particular way, go somewhere different.
Well, that, that's, that's part of the approach.
It, I think it's also really important
that the decisions taken at the time
of the emergency when the recovery is occurring.
Yes. That's, that's when it's req that needed
and a link with the adaptation planning is, is,
is also needed.
Yeah. Thank you, Judy.
Thank you. Um, Dr. Lawrence, appreciate your time today
and, and your very, um, specific and clear, um, submission.
Thanks for joining us. Thank you for
The Time. Oh, we
appreciate it. Um,
we are gonna move on next time, just seeing who we've got.
I believe we have, uh, Papa tip, um,
um, up next.
And I think we have Angie and Trevor with us.
I can see Trevor. Um, Angie,
feel free to turn on your camera.
Um, I will, uh, hand over to you both.
There is 10 minutes set aside for your submission
and, uh, you might like to leave some time for questions.
Uh, is my colleague Angie arrived? Not yet. Okay.
No, she is here. She just doesn't have her camera on
Gie I'll just let Angie introduce herself at this stage.
Yeah. Uh,
called Angie Hopkinson ua.
Uh, I'm here. Today's my role
as Mano emergency facilitator for Miku.
Um, and to support Trevor, uh, speaking to our submission,
um, I helped, uh, co-author the submission.
So I'll be here to answer, um,
and support Trevor with any questions if the committee has
any at the end of our time.
Yep. Hey, thank you first for the opportunity, uh,
to present, uh, on this bill.
Um, in my previous role, I was general manager
for Oranga Targa,
or one of the teams I managed, there was the Whanau
and Emergency Response team.
Uh, they'd been working since the, uh,
the Christchurch Earthquakes are strengthening Hapu
and whanau response to emergencies.
Uh, I left that role, uh, about a year ago,
just over a year ago perhaps.
And at the same time, that team was disestablished
as NY ahu, uh, went through a restructure
and saw the work that they were doing
as being the responsibility of Crown, uh, rather than Iwi.
Um, however, they gained a huge amount of experience in,
uh, how to do, how to en engage with Maori within community,
um, to ensure that they were part of not only the response,
um, and recovery phases,
but of the reduction in readiness phase
with a particular focus on readiness
and preparation of communities.
In the last year of operation.
Um, we managed to establish two roles, uh, one in Southland
and one in Otago, working
with our Papa Tippo Marai with our NY Tahu, um, uh,
agencies or, or marai based, uh,
organizations within those two areas, a total
of seven marae based organizations
with one worker based in Southland, one based in,
uh, in Otago.
And they were working to our n owned organizations
with a strong link to the local sedums.
Um, so much of our, uh, submission is based around
that experience and the continuing
and ongoing experience of our, uh,
UA emergency facilitators.
Key points to our submission, I think, is
that throughout the submission you talk about, uh, Maori,
um, within the nato, uh, we are particularly,
uh, keen to see Iwi, uh, being directly acknowledged
and mandated throughout the bill.
The, um, the NATO Claim Settlement Act,
and the, uh, NATO apology, uh, crown Apology both, uh,
recognized the Rana of NATO within its awa.
So to bring in, uh, the, the thought that, uh,
Maori were the, uh, agencies
or the organizations that engaged with you, engaged with,
uh, to facilitate, uh, input into, uh,
activities within our awa really does, uh, breach our,
uh, treaty settlement, um, act.
So I think there needs to be some real clear consideration,
uh, of how this, uh, this bill, if given effect, uh,
could actually breach our settlement act.
And so we, we, we do require, uh, an iwi acknowledgement,
um, within there the, um,
part of our, our mahi at local level is to engage with each
of our papa and the, uh,
emergency emergency management committees and, uh, the kegs.
And we have personnel that sit on all of those.
They, they sit on those committees at the invitation
of the local body representatives
and mayors that sit on them, um,
and they have done for many years.
But this act is actually, uh, an opportunity to embed roles
for iwi representation on those committees, ensuring that,
um, that kind of all of community engagement occurs.
And so we, we really do need to see, uh, this, this, um,
this bill, and as it moves into an act giving effect
to the ability, in fact, the necessity of having, uh, uh,
iwi engagement, man engagement on those panels, we note
that the NATO is actually 53%
of the land area of New Zealand
and, uh, experiences multiple emergency events.
Uh, and as we know, some of those are very major.
Um, therefore, this is further, uh, I think rationale
for why we need, that's particularly
specifically NATO representation,
UA represe representation down at our 18 Papa Taka level.
Um, the, I think the,
the, we see in our, uh, in our, uh,
UA of emergency facilitator roles,
a real development across Otago
and Southland in developing, uh, real reduction
and, uh, readiness, uh, of our,
particularly our Marai communities
and our wider Maori communities.
Through the work of these groups, uh, we've established
that this MAHI is a pilot that was, um, 40% funded by
and 60% funded through the local sedums.
We're working now on moving that from a pilot study into a,
a more embedded process, uh,
because of the, the outstanding results
that have been achieved and preparing our, our marai, uh,
both UA
and AKA Mara for responding to emergencies.
Uh, this has included the placement, I think
of something in the order
of 24 emergency pods at Marai throughout, uh,
running training programs on how
to use the resources within them, um,
and establishing marai based emergency response groups, uh,
as well as prep preparation for things like the, uh, um,
uh, gosh, the, the, the, you know, the, uh, level eight, uh,
um, earthquake
that's expected down here along the fault line.
So there's been a lot of good work done.
Uh, the submission points out several areas
where we believe the bill can be, uh, improved and, um,
and wording to improve those.
Uh, I encourage you to review those carefully.
Um, but in particular, I think those things that, uh,
one, we have, uh, iwi not Maori within the bill.
Two, we have, um, legislated, uh,
representation on the emergency groups.
And three, um, within the National Planning Framework, um,
is very, very, at the moment,
the bill is if we've got a very weak
national planning framework for Maori, um,
and we would request that of any national framework
that provides advice
and support from a Maori perspective
would have within the bill a mandated iwi representative
from given the size of our,
and the number of responses that we need.
Kda, thank you for that. I'll leave any time left
for for questions.
Good. Trevor, um, we, we we're into the last minute,
but can I just ask, are, are you concerned
that the bill is written?
Is it that it's not specific to kahu, um, in terms
of naming them?
Or is it that you just don't think in general, it,
it is specific enough about including, uh, iwi,
uh, on civil defense, um, local boards?
I think that it needs speci speci specificity around,
not Maori, but ua, um,
and iwi with within those areas.
Yes. I think Na Tahu needs to be named
as, as having a specific appointment on any national Maori
body given our covers 53% of the country.
And, um, we should
therefore be represented at a national advisory level
of such a, a group has established.
Okay. Thank you. That, that, that's clear.
Um, and, and that just provides
that extra detail, which I found really helpful.
Appreciate your time.
We are out of time, unfortunately, but, um, um, URA to you
and to Angie, um,
and we're gonna move on now to the Lifelines Council,
and I believe Lisa is online.
Just give Lisa a minute to pop up
and I can, um, turn on her camera.
Yeah, we can see you here, Lisa, if you just Oh, perfect.
Yep. Thank you. Standing look, um, the time is yours.
Um, I'm just checking my time. Yep.
There, there is 10 minutes for this one.
So, um, you might like to leave, um, three
or four for questions, but, uh,
I'll let you know when there's a minute
or two to run all yours.
I will. Thank you, Koto.
And thank you very much for the opportunity to present.
Uh, I'll start briefly with a bit of my background.
I'm co-chair of the New Zealand Lifelines Council, which,
um, we've outlined our, um, the role
of our group in the, uh, submission.
Uh, I've been involved in 25 years, uh,
for over 25 years in infrastructure, asset management,
and, uh, resilience.
It specifically, um, spending about half
of my time in those, um, decades in the lifelines
and infrastructure resilience space.
I'm actually a civil engineer
by profession I should mention, if you are interested.
Um, I've been part of the development of national practices
for lifeline utility coordination, no,
across the four RS risk reduction through to recovery.
I am an independent consultant,
but under various contracts,
I managed the Auckland Lifelines Group for 15 years.
Um, I was the first Auckland Lifeline Utility Coordinator,
which is an operational infrastructure coordination
role in an emergency.
Um, and I did that for about 15 years,
and I've been part of the New Zealand Council
for, uh, over 10 years.
Um, I lead the development
of the National Infrastructure Vulnerability Assessment,
developed the first National Fuel plan
and a number of other stuff.
Anyway, um, I'll talk briefly to, um, in the, uh,
to two main points.
Um, assuming you've read the, the submission,
the first one relates to the definition
of essential infrastructure providers, um, um,
may I call them EOPS for brevity.
Um, uh, that essential infrastructure providers is the term
that replaces lifeline utilities on, on,
on the original CDMX.
And I want to remind, um, the committee
of why this particular group will legislate
and why it's important that we review the schedule of, um,
legislative lifeline utilities.
This time. The legislation in 2002 followed two decades
of research into
how damaging our crazy hazard escape could be to our
physical infrastructure assets
and the important services that are provided through them.
Um, and that research also, um,
gave us a real growing awareness
of this interdependency issue.
You'll know all about those now, right?
Electricity goes out, telco starts going out,
wastewater starts overflowing.
That's the heart of what our we do in lifelines.
Um, but as lifelines coordination practices evolve,
we realized that list, that original list that came out of
that work that we did in the late part of the last century
was, um, there were key emissions, flood protection,
and river control assets protect other lifelines assets.
And they're not as inert
as we might think You've seen them slump, um, collapse
and other forms of failure.
Um, solid waste collection
and disposal is so critical to keeping, um, roads clear so
that lifelines can access, um, uh, this their,
uh, critical sites.
The, uh, we also mentioned cash payments
and digital services, which infrastructure systems
increasingly reliant in modern days.
So we've long believed that these lifeline utilities
or EOPS should include those sectors.
And we feel that waiting
for a subsequent review when we've known about this
for decades is frustration.
And keeping the existing schedule
alongside a much broader definition in the,
in the legislation, is the potential to create confusion.
The second point we want to make is
that we think there should be a distinction
between essential infrastructure providers
and essential services and different legislative provisions.
I talked about why, um, the these, uh, providers
that rely on physical infrastructure need
to do more risk reduction, more hazarded threat analysis,
um, as a basis for their service continuity planning.
But again, we now much understand that
what we've called our critical customers the likes of, um,
corrections, fast moving consumer goods
and banks, um, are also essential services
and also should be legislated to, um,
to do service continuity planning.
Um, so we think there are two, two groups
of essential services and essential infrastructure providers
and, um, that should be captured within the legislation.
I wanna say that we recognize many of the sectors
and organizations that aren't in the legislation at the
moment are participating vol voluntarily, where they, um,
where resources allow, where they're asked or, um, um,
or where they see community good
or value to their organization.
But some aren't, and some are participating minimally.
And the legislative driver is vague.
We believe we need clarity on which sectors are legislated.
And for eip EOPS to have specific requirements
to undertake hazard and threat analysis as a basis
for their service continuity plans
and participate in Lifelines groups,
which isn't in the legislation.
Um, this, uh, the co uh, infrastructure coordination,
we understand this could be left to subsequent guidance,
but in my experience, it's the legislation
that gets hurt at a board level.
And these are the, these are really important aspects
that should be lifted into the legislation
and not lifted to the guidance.
And finally, I'll add that in my 25 years in the sector,
I've seen organization nor resources for this area come
and go, including NMAs
and relying on voluntary efforts in the good times is
not sufficient to shore.
We have resilient
infrastructure services over the long term.
So let's get the legislative, uh, direction clear
and explicit, and let's understand who we are legislating.
And I'm happy to answer questions.
Okay. There's a couple of people came with questions
and we've got just under four minutes,
so we'll start with Andy Foster.
Yeah, look, um, thanks very much.
Um, uh, Lisa, two questions if I can.
First, one of 'em is the list of, um, lifelines,
or, sorry, uh, eip ps um, I don't think I saw in that list
of organizations like ports, airports, um,
uh, councils as RCAs, for example, um, ferries,
because we had Kiwi rail asking us about that.
And we also had the ambulance services.
They, they often get left on the outside.
Now they might be a, a provider.
And could you just tell us what your views are on that?
Seems like you want a fairly broad approach.
Um, so, um, with respect to, so, so
with respect to, um, services like ambulance service
that are, that are wanting to be captured as part
of essential services, I think that's, um, that's part of
what we consider, um, what, what we are recommending.
Um, but that they are a separate category from the
requirements essential infrastructure providers.
So, um, you know,
ambulance obviously relies on Lifeline services for,
you know, a lot of things.
Um, sorry, the first part of your question was, well,
I, I, I think of, of the organizations
like ports, um, yes.
Airports, uh, councils as RCAs, of course, of course.
And we also had Kiwi Rail talking about the ferries.
Yes. And of course, all those, most, uh, most
of those apart from the ferries are already captured in the
legislative definition that the transport providers.
But yes, certainly we believe, um, uh, one of the aspects is
that it's the infrastructure providers
that have been legislated.
And sometimes there are parts of the service,
like the service, the ferry services that run
between the ports, um,
and the air traffic control, um, that supports, um,
you know, the airports and things like that,
that also need to be captured.
Okay, thanks. Look, the other part of the question,
if I can quickly is just the expectations
that we should be pro requiring of, uh,
these essential infrastructure providers
and service, um, organizations so that,
that there's a confidence
that they've actually done the work that needs to be done,
so that if there's a, a major event of some sort, uh,
they can get up and running relatively quickly,
or in fact, they can keep running all the way through.
That's right. And look, you know,
lifeline utilities are a really strong sector
when it comes to response.
And they have good response plans.
This is their bread and butter.
They get out and fix outages every day.
But the, you know, like I said, the level of quality of
the sort of underlying hazard analysis that underpins that,
and should we have longer battery lives over here than over
here because we know that the, you know,
this is more vulnerable to electricity loss, that sort
of planning, that's where the variability, um, lies
and we believe more robustness is required.
Okay. Thank you. And,
and so Lisa, I just wanna make sure I've understood,
and the, and the current sort Defense Emergency Management
Act schedule one where it lists specific airports ports.
Yep. So would you like to see changes to that
to add more organizations specifically?
Or is that That's correct. That's, yeah.
So add them into schedule one?
That's correct. Yes.
It's the schedule, because at the moment they've brought in
a new legislative de definition,
which in clause seven I believe it is,
which is potentially very broad.
Um, and yet they haven't updated the schedule, uh, which,
um, uh, which lists out the specific sectors
and organizations, and it's that schedule we believe
must be updated as part of this legislative review.
Otherwise, we dunno who's being legislated.
Yeah. And I certainly see a few people missing from the
current schedule one.
Yep. Yep. If you have on page four of your submission,
you have, you have listed, um, some, uh, existing sheet, uh,
sectors, and then you've got, you know,
recommended additions.
Yes. Yes. Would, would you just wanna cover them broadly?
'cause at the moment it's specific, it doesn't say airports,
for example, it says it's new Plymouth
Airport and Toron Airport.
Would you want to just have, for example, solid waste,
or would you want to list the specific
organizations for each region?
How do you see that working?
Yeah, well, I think, um, there does need
to be specific consideration of the organizations, um, uh,
just to make sure that you capture the
right, the right ones.
I mean, we wanting to capture the major providers of, um, OO
of, uh, waste collection system.
Not everybody that does a garden, you know,
service type thing.
Yeah. Um, so, um, so yes, I think, um, you know, perhaps,
uh, specifying, um, providers of urban, uh,
collection systems and, and LA landfills or,
or something like that, we could certainly, um, you know,
provide some advice on more explicitly, uh,
around organizations if that would be useful.
Um, but yes, we believe there should be more specifics
around the organizations that are captured.
Thanks, Lisa. And I will be asking,
um, Nima about this later.
So I, I do intend to follow up on your submission.
Thank you very much. Thank you.
Um, we do need to keep moving. Okay.
And I think it's, um, uh, next up
and I believe that they are online.
Um, and maybe
on their behalf, yes, you can, um, turn on your camera,
unmute, and we will hand over the time to you.
I'll let you know when there's a minute or so to go,
but you may like to leave some time for questions.
It's really helpful. All yours.
Thank you very much. Uh,
so good morning everyone.
My name's, uh, te uh, I'm the chair of Van Trust.
Uh, before speaking to our submission,
I just wanna acknowledge the impact
of the North Island severe weather event, uh, from the 13th
to the 14th of February in 2023, uh,
on communities across our ROI of tomato, Maui,
and the wider north island.
Uh, the loss disruption
and the long-term consequences of that event continues
to be felt by whanau communities and local systems today.
So again, I'm here speaking on behalf of, uh, Mandi Trust,
uh, the PSGE entity of a hapu based in nap.
And the we have six within from
the impacts were significant
and enduring, uh, during the cycling of our six marai.
Two were severely impacted.
And, uh, now in category three areas requiring relocation,
which is still ongoing today.
While Mara was damaged by flooding
and required two years of work before it could reopen.
And last year we were lucky enough to reopen that Mara
and two other Mara saw our immediate surrounding
communities, whanau papa are heavily impacted
and were utilized as response hubs during the event.
And through the long recovery that followed,
I personally supported the setup
and operations of one of those Mara hubs, my own home.
And our community of Waki were also
severely impacted by this event.
As a pg, we supported the regional
response at a local level.
Our Mara did the mahi on the ground, sheltering,
coordinating support,
and continuing that role through response and into recovery.
Our experience and our recommendations are
just not theoretical.
It was lived and it was clearly shown
where the emergency management system works,
but also importantly, where it does not man hold.
Uh, trust holds statutory responsibility
and cultural obligations under our deed of settlement,
including kaga over our Tonga,
and a duty to protect the wellbeing of our,
it's from this position
and from lived experience that we make the submission today.
Thanks again for the time this morning.
So this is where man sits on the, we support the intent
of the bill, and particularly we acknowledge the efforts
to learn from recent severe events
and to lift minimum standards across the
system, that direction is right.
We also support the bill where it begins
to recognize Maori participation, the need
to identify disproportionately affected communities
and the value of local knowledge and community networks.
Where, however, we have a difference of opinion is
that the bill still treats Maori capability as something
to be engaged with rather than something to be relied on
or empowered and practice.
The system already depends on UA during emergencies,
but in law that reality is not
yet reflected without targeted changes,
the gaps will continue.
Our recommendations are not theoretical,
like I mentioned before.
They are practical changes across the four RS reduction,
readiness, response, and recovery.
Each one is about aligning the law with
what already happens on the ground,
and making sure the resilience on Maori capacity is matched
with authority, resourcing,
and accountability and our submission.
We have six key recommendations,
and I'd like to briefly speak to each one.
Uh, first is recognition of PSGs
and Mara's essential community service providers
during emergencies.
PSGs and Mara already operate
as frontline service providers.
They provide shelter, welfare, food, ordination, comms,
trusted leadership, uh,
gave the example earlier I spoke to earlier about, uh,
a hub, uh, at Alai Following the cyclone.
Our community in Manai were cut off infrastructure failed
bridge broken in half.
Uh, the Mara was an island, uh,
and we were it for the community.
Yet the bill does not formally recognize the role
that creates uncertainty and planning access to information
and access to resources.
Our recommendation is simple to recognize PSGs
and Mara's as central community service providers within the
emergency management framework.
That recognition would embed us into plans and the exercises
before events occur, not
after systems are already under strain.
It aligns legislation with reality rather than continuing
to rely on goodwill and improvisation.
Uh, recommendation two, uh, direct funding of reimbursement.
Uh, Maria Maori organizations routinely deliver emergency
services, like I mentioned before,
but funding of reimbursement pathways remain
inconsistent and slow.
During the cycling.
While our village was flooding,
we shouted 120 people at our marai in the recovery phase.
Up to 300 people a day were coming through the marai.
We had no access to dedicated resources
and relied on our own limited fundings to establish
and operate the hub purchasing what was needed.
The costs were not reimbursed,
despite some support from the community groups for and,
and supplies and don't wanna undercook the support
that the community gave during, during the cycling.
But, uh, the Mara also, uh, Mara Hapu had to,
to front a lot of costs.
Uh, we recommending a dedicated funding
and reimbursement mechanism
that supports readiness activities in advance
and reimburse reasonable costs during declared emergencies.
Uh, 0.3, empower PSGs, declare emergencies.
Uh, I'd already mentioned that, uh, the responsibilities
of us as A PSG, we recommend enabling PSGs
to declare TA wire emergency within our,
or here when serious threats exist
and local resources are insufficient,
this would not replace our local authorities.
It would operate alongside them.
The intent here is not to, uh, fragment.
Uh, we often see risk early, understand our,
our understand our rivers, understand our streams through
maga, uh, passed on from, uh,
from our elders and can act quickly.
We're on the ground. We are local.
Sorry, just gonna turn the light back on.
It's switched off for me just a second.
That's okay. And we,
we've got two minutes left for this submission.
Just letting you know.
Thank you. Uh, I'll just round out with, um,
the last few recommendations.
Cross boundary responses
and recovery mandate, Maori cultural standards
and mandate post, uh, event reviews.
Uh, just to wrap up, one, the trust supports the direction
of the travel of the emergency management bill.
With refinements outlined in our submission,
the bill can reflect, better reflect Maori leadership
and capability in a way that strengthens e
emergency management for everyone.
And
I'm just seeing if anyone else has any questions.
Just for our last minute, I, I noticed you recommend
that post-settlement governance en entities are included.
Um, what would that look like for pre-settlement iwi?
Um, part, I guess if they're in the,
it wouldn't be exclusive of, um, pre-settlement entities.
I guess it wouldn't be inclusive of, of those entities.
Also here, ini, I can only speak for us.
Uh, and by and large, we've all settled.
Uh, I don't think we've got any
or too many in that boat where we are in Hawkes Bay.
Okay.
To m thank you, um, for your, um,
sharing your thoughts
and your submission with us, we appreciate it.
Um, we are gonna move on to our next one now.
And I think we have Andrea, David,
and Emily from the New Zealand Planning Institute online.
Um, I can see Emily there, so, um,
feel free to turn on your cameras.
Welcome, Emily. Um, I'll hand over to you. Welcome David.
And, uh, we have 10 minutes,
I believe it is for your submission.
So, um, you might like to leave, um, some time
for questions, and I'll let
you know when there's a couple minutes to run.
It's all yours,
Your Honor.
I think you the opportunity to speak today.
I'm Andrea Harris, chair of Tea Cota,
the New Zealand Planning Institute.
And joining me online is David Curtis, who's the CEO
and Emily Grace, who is our Chief Policy Officer.
I have one key point to make to the committee this morning,
which is that there needs to be greater coordination
between the emergency management and planning
and the actual environment legislation.
Both this emergency management bill and the planning
and natural environment bills are going
through the legislative development process simultaneously.
It is the perfect opportunity to make the two systems talk
to and support each other.
We would like to emphasize the role of planning
and risk management
and why coordination between the emergency management
and the planning and resource management
systems is so important.
The four hours of emergency management are reduction,
readiness, response and recovery.
All four aspects are covered by the emergency management.
Bill planning has a critical role to play in risk reduction
and in stopping the creation
of risk at the first place in the first place.
Planning determines where buildings and people go
and can be very effective in keeping
people out of harm's way.
And let's mean the burden
that falls on readiness, response and recovery.
However, planning is covered by a different piece
of legislation currently, the Resource Management Act,
and soon to be the Planning Act and Natural Environment Act.
Both, both the emergency management
and planning systems require planning for risk management,
and both systems have comparative
hierarchies of planning documents.
The emergency management bill requires a national emergency
management strategy and national emergency Management plan,
and a regional emergency management plan.
By comparison, the new planning
and environment natural environment system requires national
policy direction and national standards.
Regional spatial plans, regional environment plans,
and land district land use plans.
That is seven different plans that all include direction
and provisions for managing risk,
but there's no requirement for either set of documents
to take account of or to be consistent with the other.
This allows for unnecessary duplication
and conflicting risk settings to occur.
Managing risk is such an important task for New Zealand.
We should be taking a comprehensive approach using the tools
and systems we have in a coordinated way
so we can do a better job of keeping people safe.
The emergency management bill provide the legislative anchor
for greater coordination and Clause 3G, which we support,
but there's not a lot else in the bill that gives effect
to this purpose of encouraging coordination.
We've made some, some suggestions in our submissions for
how greater coordination could be required in the bill.
For instance, both legislative systems should have one
common risk management goal, one method for assessing risk
and common natural hazard in risk data sets.
Other practical improvements would be
to align the national emergency management plan
with the national policy direction under the planning bill
and the regional emergency management plans to align
with land use and environment plans.
Planning leaders should also be named within the
emergency management governance.
We have made corresponding recommendations in our submission
to the Environment Committee on the planning
and natural environment bills to ensure wider consistency
for natural hazard risk management in New Zealand.
We are happy to answer any questions
or provide any follow up to officials if required.
Thank you.
Thank you, um, very much.
And I'll hand over first
to Andy Foster for the first question.
And you're just muted, Andy, so
I'll put that again. Thank you
very much. I'm delight to hear, delighted to hear
what you're saying about integrating the two, um,
planning mechanisms and, uh,
and the emergency management side.
You've gotta comment in your written submission, um, at 15
to require regional emergency management plans
to be consistent with applicable spatial plans.
My question really is
whether it should be the other way around.
In other words, if, if a hazard is being identified
that the spatial plan should pick up that hazard and try
and to, um, reduce risk at the front end rather than, um,
uh, obviously what we see too often, um,
the ambulance at the bottom of the cliff,
That's a, um, a valid point to make.
Um, at the end of the day, we really want
that greater consistency between the two documents, uh,
the two pieces of legislation.
We're in a really unique position where both pieces
of legislation are being crafted now, um,
and the ability to actually get
that coordination happening in a more consistent
way would be useful.
So, point I've made to both Minister Mitchell,
but also to Nima.
And, um, and I think it's equally applicable
to the emergency management, um, operations within each, um,
each council area, um, is that I'd expect them
to be getting involved in the planning, um, process in the,
in the develop of district plans and, uh,
and high level, um, plans as well.
And pointing out, um,
any deficiencies those plans might have in terms of risk.
And likewise the insurance industry as well.
Um, I know I've heard quite a bit from them say
that they're get very distressed by the, some
of the development proposals.
Would that be helpful?
I think it would be. I think there's a number of, um,
submitters on your emergency management bill
that have said there needs to be greater consistency.
There needs to be, um, it's linking people.
You've got things happening, um,
through the emergency management bill, um,
but actually relies on the planning bills
to actually make it happen.
So I think the more that
that integration can occur, the better.
Brilliant. Thank you. Could I add, just add to
that briefly, that the, the spatial plan definitely is a
really important part of the new planning system and,
and there's a, there's a need
for the reciprocal recognition in the emergency management
leg legislation as well to deal with the timing
of when the plans are developed.
So the spatial plan might be prepared
before the regional emergency management plans,
for instance, um, or the other way round.
So you kind of need both plans to have a consistency
because one might go before the other,
or there might be an update to one
that needs to be reflected in the other.
So that's why it's a reciprocal kind of requirement.
Completely understand.
I'm really just saying that the two of them need
to be talking to each other all the way through.
Yeah. Yeah. Thanks.
Thank you. I think that's a, a really well made point.
I think you've been really clear.
So, um, thank you
and thanks for the written submission,
which we've got got with us here as well.
And we do have S one district council waiting,
so we'll move on.
Appreciate your time, um, today.
Uh, and I think we have Mia, Lydia,
and Al from, um, s district council.
So, um, uh,
just give you a minute to jump into the room
and turn on your cameras mute
and we'll hand over the time to you.
I can see s here.
Ah, there we are. You worship. Welcome.
Uh, we're gonna give you, um, set aside 10 minutes for you.
Um, you might like to leave some time for questions.
You can take your written submission as read.
Um, and I'll let you know when there's a minute
or so to run all yours.
Yeah. Awesome. Thank you so much.
Uh, look, I think first up, uh, thank you
for the opportunity to speak to this and, um, yeah.
So to intro, um, my name is Lydia.
I am the mayor of Selwyn,
and we have Al Lawn, who is head
of our emergency management at council as well,
uh, online with us.
Uh, look, Selwyn is,
and I think you hear this all the time, one
of the well is the fastest growing district in, uh,
in Canterbury, uh, in the country actually,
and part of the Canterbury CDEM group.
Our region has a significant experience responding
to adverse events, and we support the intent of the bill.
But, um, we've worked through this
and there's some, uh, practical
refinements that we see are needed.
And we see that a strong system must actually remain locally
led, uh, and community focused.
I wanna touch off on a few things
and then Al will touch on the more practical, uh, side
of the things because he's the operations side of this.
Um, but I think one of the most pressing issues for, uh,
councils across the country is, um, that it's
introducing new planning, reporting,
and compliance obligations.
And the regulatory impact identifies $82 million in new
costs for councils over four years.
Uh, so we pair that at the same time with proposed rates,
caps, uh, and reduce revenue.
And we start to look in the space of
how do we actually deliver this, uh, for our community.
Um, when expectations are increasing
and funding flexibility is substantially reduced.
There's also a little bit of legislative alignment.
Uh, and councils are managing a lot of reforms at once.
Um, as you will be well aware of, uh, with the planning,
the building hazards, structural change
and the emergency management
and different legislation defines
hazards and roles differently.
So for us, it's actually just a greater alignment across all
of the reform that is happening, uh, right now.
Um, will actually improve the efficiency
and clarity for our communities.
Uh, and look, we noted the bell,
and I was listening to some earlier people, is just
around the Maori involvement, uh, in CDEM.
And our iwi, uh,
are really involved when we have emergencies, uh, and,
and they provide services and, um, support our community.
And so, you know, I think there needs to be a role
that's included in that too.
But, uh, I'll hand over to Al, uh,
and let him talk about role clarity.
Good. Uh, thank you for your time. Um, role clarity.
The bill introduces multiple terms that need clar,
uh, clearer definitions.
Controllers have been, there are more controller roles now.
Uh, we believe that there should be just one controller role
working at operating at different levels.
That's clause 1, 2, 4.
Uh, district controllers
and recovery managers should have the authority
to direct at the moment.
Uh, it talks about coordinating,
but of truly locally led by d definition means directing
regional controllers do not have time
to direct right across a number of local
responses at the same time, uh, we believe that, uh,
locally local controllers should have the
ability, uh, to lead.
It should be explicit in there.
We also believe that the director general should be able
to authorize controllers to work right across New Zealand.
Um, there should be a carra qualified and competent people,
and that is the underlying, um, mechanism.
They should be qualified and competent, uh,
and they should be able to assist, uh, across the country.
Uh, essential infrastructure.
I've heard a number of people talking about this and,
and they have, uh, highlighted probably better than me.
Uh, but we believe
that the principles based definition is supported,
but the key services should be explicitly recognized,
flood protection, telemetry, solid waste,
fast moving consumable distribution, banking
and payment system cloud and digital providers.
Uh, flood telemetry particularly is critical
to evacuation and life saving.
Uh, life safety. There's so much interdependencies
and previous people have talked about that, especially likes
of telcos, power companies and telemetry.
Uh, there's a high life risk there.
We also believe that there's a gap, uh,
before emergencies are declared.
Uh, and there should be some sort
of recognition within there so that controllers
and those running, uh,
or preparing for an event can manage those situations.
Uh, we recommend that there's a statutory framework
for early intervention.
In other words, preemptive work, uh,
and liabilities for protection
for responders acting in good faith should
be included in the act.
We also support independent oversight
of the assurance function, such as an inspector general,
which is very similar to Australia.
The system works well in Australia.
There's unequivocal evidence for reform. We support reform.
The, is the balance right? Does it go far enough?
Is this bill transformational?
Uh, we believe it's a step on the ladder,
but we leave believe it should go further.
Uh, we also believe that we should align expectations
with funding, clarify roles
and powers, strengthen iwi partnership, uh,
recognize essential infrastructure, provide tools
and undeclared emergencies, and align with wider reforms.
Thank you for your time. Happy to take questions.
Can I, can I start? Thank you. Um, me, Lydia, and Al.
Can I start and I'll see who else has got one?
Just asking your, your maybe second point,
Al was about the relationship between the regional
and the local, um, uh,
I guess incident controller.
Yeah. Yes. Um,
so you are saying don't give the regional
controller the ability to direct, just have
that at the local level?
No, should be both. This should have the same powers,
it should be very, very clear
that at a controller has the ability to direct
and coordinate by having all these different terms.
You're conflating it. Just make it very, very simple.
And, and just just so I'm clear, is that, um,
do you have the clause that that's in, in front of you?
I, I've probably missed it in your submission,
but I just, I'd like, otherwise I'll find it.
But, um, if you had it sitting in front of you. Uh,
1, 1, 2, 4, uh, 57. I think it's
57. Okay. Thank
you. Andy Foster.
Yeah, thank you. Um, and, uh, congratulations, uh, Lydia,
um, on, uh, on becoming the mayor.
Um, so, um, so, um, question that I've got is just
that in terms of that, that, um, preemptive, um, action.
Uh, and I know that we've had a couple of situations,
particularly in your area and in Christchurch with, and,
and as well with the desire for preemptive, um, uh, action
where we've got rising, uh, rising river levels.
They haven't hit whatever the, the RMA um,
or conservation water conservation order,
um, threshold is to act.
But you can see it's likely by the time it gets
to the threshold, it becomes too dangerous to act.
And I'm thinking of, you know, um, lake smear,
I'm thinking of Lake Forsyth.
I'm thinking of the, the YRO River as examples.
That's the kind of thing you're talking about.
Absolutely. Section three 30 of the RMA gives you powers
to, uh, to act, I believe,
and this is just me, is
that controllers should have the powers all the time.
You've got friends, you've got fire officers
that can act at any time.
I know that there's a big shift in there,
and that takes away democracy.
But to be able to act quickly and preemptively
and have those powers, the underlying thing there is
that controllers must be competent, capable and trained.
There is no real training for controllers in New Zealand
and understand that there might be a reservation
to give those powers to people who are untrained.
Okay. So you're looking for some,
some change in the legislation,
which obviously has a trigger in terms of a level of risk,
but the level of risk is a decision made by
somebody who's competent, trained,
et cetera. That's really what you're looking for.
Absolutely. How would that training be, um, developed?
I mean, we train people for all kinds of things.
So obviously what you're saying is there's no clearly
recognized training arrangement for, um, for controllers.
We don't, we used to have, uh,
a national controller training.
Uh, there used to be a, a national
Civil Defense training college.
Uh, but similar to when I was in the police,
we got our basic training,
but then we came through as a sergeant,
we did a proper sergeant's course.
Controllers have a lot more power than a sergeant of police.
Well, they have similar power as a sergeant of police.
'cause it says any constable
or controller in most of the act.
Uh, but these controllers are often tier two,
tier three managers within a council.
It is not their day job.
They're not full-time professionals in emergency management,
and they aren't given the tools to deliver on
what is required to them, particularly in,
uh, in emergencies.
I don't, I don't think it's fair to be honest.
If I can ask one more question, Tim? Yeah,
I'll just go to, uh, LA first.
Okay. Go for, and then if there's
time, we'll come back. Yeah, sure.
Thank you. Just a very quick sub, uh,
I was just listening intently to the controller role.
How critical is that in terms of decision making,
when something occurs at that controller is prepared,
makes very effective, and, uh, important decisions.
Just really chasing the, the time is of essence to act
Absolutely, absolutely critical.
They are the decision maker.
Uh, their mission, their intent leads their action planning
and leads the tasks that are carried out.
Uh, they need to be much better trained.
Thank you. And, and Andy, we do have, uh,
one minute left. So you've Yeah. Got,
Probably, probably the easiest way of, of doing this Al,
is the point you make.
Obviously we had this training arrangement,
we don't have it anymore, so
something's obviously happened to that.
I'll be interested in knowing what that is,
but also in how if we do go down that track,
we might actually set something else up
that actually gave us the con the controllers
with the abilities that, um, you're saying that we need.
'cause I know there's a lot of great
ability out around the country.
Absolutely. Obviously we need, we need,
what you're saying is we need more.
I have an offer which is a center of excellence
for crisis leadership.
It's not just controllers, it's business continuity.
Um, ces
and those people who are dealing with this a lot, dealing
with crisis, we as a country should be able
to do this really, really well.
We are the second most vulnerable country in the world.
Why wouldn't be good at this?
We should be training people to do this stuff.
I think we might need to commu to communicate
A bit more on this. Yeah.
Thank you. Yeah, thank you.
And really, um, appreciate your time.
Um, Lydia, we appreciate the specifics and the nitty gritty.
Oh, it's, it's, it's really helpful
as we try to refine this.
So thank you.
Um, but we are going to move on
to Carolyn Press Mackenzie from, um,
so if you are there, feel free to turn on your camera.
We've got a wonderful hha team in Otaki, so I'm excited
to hear from you today.
Um, and, uh, we've got, uh, the next sort
of nine or 10 minutes for you.
You might like to leave some time for questions.
I'll let you know when there's a minute remaining in any
case, but it's all yours.
Sure. Can you hear me Okay?
We can, yes. Perfect. Okay.
So, um, as you said, I'm Carolyn Press Mackenzie,
is there an echo for you? I'm experiencing?
Yeah. Andy, can you just try muting, see if
that fixes it. Try that now.
Hi. Hi. Hi. Hi. Lemme try, try, try.
God. That's a really good echo.
Is that a little bit better? God, that's a really good echo.
Is that a little bit better? That's a really good
intro. Is that better?
Yeah, it's, it's not a lot better if I'm honest.
I'm not sure what? I'm not sure what's hitting.
Maybe you could just, um, what, what, I'll tell you what,
while you do your submission,
why don't you just turn your volume down at your end
and you just speak to us.
Um, and I'll do some crazy
dance if we are running outta time.
But otherwise you do your thing
and then once we finish, you can turn it back up
and we'll ask some questions.
Sounds perfect. Let me turn it down.
Yeah, yeah. How's that?
That's really good. Okay, perfect. Well done.
Hey, so my name is Carolyn Press Mackenzie,
and I'm the founder and CEO, um,
and also the deployment lead for hoa,
helping you help animals charitable trust.
Um, so basically we've been, um, responding to emergencies
for, we've been around for 25 years.
We've been actively responding to emergencies for,
for 15 years and working alongside government agencies,
NPI first responders, local authorities during earthquakes,
floods, fires, and cyclones.
We've been really active.
It, it's been a lot of work
and it's been consistent as a lot of you
I'm sure are seeing that.
Um, it doesn't seem to stop.
We also sit on the national animal welfare,
emergency manage management subfunction.
And we are regularly reg, we are regularly, um, deployed
by MPI anyway.
We also jump in for local council and we'll also jump in
and support, um, local rescues if they need support too.
Um, we welcome the bills, um, improved reg recognition
of annual welfare during emergency planning,
but we still think there are some critical gaps that remain.
So thank you for the work you have done so far.
But I think what we want to see, um, is a clear authority
around trained responders to enter private properties
to rescue animals in immediate danger when owners
cannot be contacted.
Um, we've had a lot of firsthand experience of this,
but one case in particular during Cyclone Gabrielle,
we encountered, um, a family phoned us.
They'd be, they'd been actually unconscious, both of them,
the husband and wife were both unconscious
and hospital for four days.
Um, and no one had had permission to go in
and get their three dogs out of the property.
So three days in, we were able to get contact from them,
they'd woken from their coma.
We went in, we got the dogs out.
The dogs had really enjoyed a lot of unnecessary suffering.
They had ulceration from the contaminated water, um,
and they'd not been fed.
It wasn't a great situation for them. Mm-hmm.
And those dogs meant everything to those owners.
So them being unconscious, it was out of their control
and them waking to no one having helped those dogs
absolutely destroyed.
They, they were, they were so distressed.
But fortunately we got the dogs out.
We were able to care for them while the owners remained in
hospital, and eventually we reunited them,
which was quite a beautiful situation.
Um, but what we've noticed is that disasters are fast moving
and these delays are, are costing lives.
So we think it's really important that, um,
the right people are allowed to have the right powers
to go in and get animals when it's needed.
We also recommend, um, clear authority for first responders,
including trained animal welfare responders to, um,
enter animals, uh, to enter
and get animals when they're at risk,
but also, um,
that animals not be treated like property right now.
Animals are considered property when we all know
that they're sentient animals.
Um, and that I think we need to understand
that the connection between people
and animals directly affects human lives
as well as animal lives.
So planning for the animals, putting that in the planning
and, and, and actually acknowledging that they sentient
and that they should be considered is not only going
to help, is not only going to help the animals,
it's actually going to help the people as well.
Um, we also wanted to just mention the power
to destroy animals in an emergency.
Um, while this is actually an incredibly important tool,
it needs to be safeguarded
and euthanasia should be considered a last humane resort
and guided by welfare principles
and veterinary oversight when possible.
Um, and then finally,
charities like Hua carrying major emergency responsibilities
without formal resourcing.
Um, if we could be recognized as an essential, um,
as essential to public safety,
and then roles also be clarified and defined
and sustainable re um,
reimbursement mechanisms be established,
that would be incredibly, um, useful for us.
Um, we would also like to see collaboration
and universal training that is, um, that is available
to all first responders to include teams like hoo ha
who are constantly put in these situations.
We'd love to be part of the greater
team and acknowledged for that.
And that's pretty much it.
But I thought I'd leave time for questions.
Okay. Can you still hear us now?
I need the volume up. Bear with me.
I wondered about that. And we'll start. Okay.
Hopefully you can hear us.
I'm gonna hand to, um, limo Lydia for the first question,
and then you can always mute while
you answer if you need to.
Oh, thanks, Mr. Chair. My question is really quick.
Um, it's your point number two.
Uh, where in your summary
of recommendations treat animals in
beings not merely property?
Can you just explain a bit further?
You've mentioned it before,
but if you could explain a bit further.
Sure. So this is actually, um, being recognized now.
I think it might've been around 2015, it became part
of the actual Animal Welfare Act.
Animals are now recognized as sentient, which means
that they can think, feel, have emotional connections,
problem solve, um, animals are incredible
and not just sort of production units.
So it's, it's, it's looking at a situation
and going, you know, that's a sentient bean
or an animal that thinks and feels, um,
and it needs the same sort of help and support.
Obviously we prioritize people,
but by not helping those animals,
quite often we're putting people at risk.
People break cordons, they don't evacuate, they'll try
and sneak home.
And often we've found
that they will then put our team at risk
because they're, um,
making silly choices to protect their animals.
So if we could acknowledge that the animals are important,
that the sentient that they deserve that sort of, um,
consideration, it's going
to just completely help the whole big picture,
including my team and their safety as well.
Thank you. Thank you. And, um, Andy Foster,
Sorry that I didn't take my hand down from the previous
one, so No, but thank you.
Oh, that's okay. Thank Carolyn for the submission.
Thank you. Um, Carolyn, we appreciate your time
and bearing with the technology, um,
and appreciate all that you guys at do.
Thank you, um, very much.
I certainly love what I see locally.
Um, but we are gonna move on now to Task Force Kiwi who,
uh, are up next.
And I believe we've got Richard Adams.
Oh, yes, there you are. Welcome.
Um, look, I'll hand over to you
for the next, uh, 10 minutes.
Really excited to hear your perspective on this one.
So, um, I'll let you know if there's a minute or two to run,
but you might like to leave some time for questions.
Yeah, absolutely. Thank you.
Um, and Peter, good morning everyone.
Um, mate, firstly, thanks for the opportunity to, um,
provide some feedback and to have a chat to the, um,
uh, the committee this morning.
So just for some quick context.
So I, uh, my name's Rich Adams.
I'm the founder and national Director of Tass Kiwi.
Um, we're a nationwide disaster relief organization, uh,
with 840 volunteers, um,
for whom we've deployed 503 over 23 deployments since,
uh, the end of 2022.
Uh, so just over 18 and a half
thousand volunteer hours on the ground.
Uh, and what makes us different, I suppose,
as an organization, as our people.
So the bulk of our people have served in either the defense
force or one of the emergency services.
So these are people who bring pretty incredible skill
experience that is ideal for,
for disaster relief and for those scenarios.
Uh, and we deploy them alongside members of,
of the wider community as well with specialist skill.
Uh, and we do so to provide direct support to communities,
um, in the wake of disaster.
So direct physical support, um,
during those sort 23 deployments, most of which have been,
um, here at home, but some overseas, the ones at home,
we've noticed a, a pretty consistent, um,
national gap in terms of a lack of access
to skilled experience
and coordinated volunteers on the ground
for community support.
Um, so we're not sort of referring to response agencies,
not sort of talking about or police or what, what have you.
It's, it's what comes next. So when, um, when
that initial response is over, what direct support is then
provided, um, and looking at the, uh, the reports into the,
the North island severe weather events, one of the themes
that came up time
and time again was a feeling of communities being abandoned,
uh, or feeling, or certainly feeling like they've been
abandoned, um, because they don't have that direct explore.
And it's something we come across on a pretty regular
basis, um, when we deploy.
So from our perspective, the,
the emergency management bill number two,
in its current form doesn't address that gap.
Um, so we've got some sort of thoughts
and recommendations on, on how we might be able to do that.
Um, volunteers, I think it's safe to say either,
so the backbone of emergency management in New Zealand,
but the bill is fairly light on when it
talks about volunteers.
I think they're mentioned on six occasions,
um, throughout the bill.
Um, and in its current form,
it talks about multi membrane authority.
Emergency management committees, um, are to ensure
that suit we trained and competent personnel,
including volunteers are available
and that there is an appropriate organizational structure
for those personnel for effective
emergency management in its area.
Uh, so the bill doesn't really explain how that's achieved.
Um, and probably more importantly, how that is resourced.
Um, you know, how volunteers suit to be trained,
how are they considered competent,
what function they're actually gonna be undertaking,
are they making tier to civil defense center,
or are they operating excavator helping someone
dig out a, a flooded home?
What, what role are they playing?
Um, I think coordination at a regional level, uh,
will result in significant administrative burdens
for those, for those regions.
Um, every council
or civil defense group that we've spoken
to over the last three
to four years has asked whether we're in a position
to manage spontaneous volunteers.
You know, it's great that people shop to help,
but that requires coordination and management,
and they don't have the capacity to do that.
So adding this as an extra requirement to recruit, train,
and utilize volunteers at that level,
unless it's, um, suitably um, resourced,
is gonna be a significant burden.
So from our perspective,
and obviously we're a little bit biased, um,
but we believe that the sort of model that we've got, uh,
sort of demonstrates the value
and the need for a consistent nationwide volunteer
capability as opposed to sort of more fragmented one, um,
providing that surge support
for community led disaster relief and recovery.
So it's still community led, but we're just providing boots
on the ground effectively to enable, um, that activity
to happen and work with communities as and when required.
And so using us as an example is,
so we've got 800 plus volunteers.
It's taken us four years to get to that point, um,
to develop the organization,
and that's required, um,
a significant amount of fundraising as well.
So while volunteers are free,
volunteer capability is certainly not free.
So training equipment, um, and administration.
And that's before you even get boots on the
ground, um, after disaster.
So we've raised just over half a million dollars in the last
four years, and almost every single dollar of
that has gone on to, um,
our deployments and getting people out the door.
And that's, we don't have any, um, don't have any employees.
There's no employee costs. Um,
and that's including in kind support from companies like,
uh, Mitsubishi, might, TNTR group and others.
So there's a significant cost involved.
And I just wanna give you a quick run through
of just looking at the last seven months.
Just talk about the, I guess the tempo of operations
and the need that currently exists.
Um, so July last year had the floods in Tasman.
Um, we had teams up there initially for recovery.
They then switched to, um, response managing, um,
evacuation centers, uh, and then spent another five weeks
after that undertaking, um, recovery in the area alongside,
uh, Nelson Tasman civil defense and the rural Support Trust.
And we're looking at going back to Tasman.
Uh, and then October, I think over the course of two days,
I'd called from four different, um,
four different councils asking for support.
So Nui, uh, again,
working the real support trusts with the wind event there.
In October, we deployed teams to that area.
We had teams in Kai following the wildfires there in October
with the six homes that were lost.
Uh, Klu, we have a ongoing request from the council
and, um, direct from the Minister for Rural Communities
to support those impacted by that wind event in October.
Um, same thing with MPI for Southland, um,
for farming communities in that part of the world.
We've had inquiries about our ability
to help the horticulture sector remove silt
from crops in bay.
Plenty. Um, after last month's event, uh,
we've just finished three weeks.
We're up in Northland, working in north and management
and, um, um, providing support again,
following last month's event.
Uh, last weekend we had teams out in Little River, um,
undertaking flood relief alongside Christchurch, uh,
CDA and the council.
And then just yesterday I received a call from the Royal
Support Trust asking whether we can support an tied
following last month's event.
So we're receiving always sort of constant stream
of support requests, um,
but as a, a fully volunteer charity, we sort of running on,
on fumes and, and goodwill at best.
Um, but I think it demonstrates the need that does exist
and the, the lack of capability
or capacity that currently sits at a regional level.
Um, and I just wanted to use, do a quick case study.
So our friends over in Australia, um, Australia,
and they were formed in 2017.
Um, it's comparable model, similar sort of people
who were utilized, uh, so defense
and emergency service veterans
alongside members of the wider community.
Um, we do effectively do the same thing,
so deploy in a similar fashion, um,
provide the same services at direct support on the ground,
whether it's everything from, uh, manual labor through
to operating machinery, chainsaws, whatever it might be.
I suppose the difference is around resourcing.
So in 20 22, 23, um, they received 38.1 million,
um, from the federal government.
And that was a, a pledge from both the liberal
and the labor parties at the time.
Uh, and that was to develop a skilled organiz nationwide
volunteer resource with a particular focus on recovery.
So they've got, um,
now I've got 50 plus staff across Australia.
Um, and then on, on the flip side, you've got us
with no staff and, uh, and no sort of formal resourcing.
So the, the need is there, the Australians have recognized
that, which is fantastic, uh,
appreciate it's a different country, different context,
but it's just a good case study, I think
to, um, to reference.
Um, so, and in our response, we provided some wording, um,
or potential wording that's designed to make sort
of the volunteer engagement process a little bit more
robust than what it currently is.
Um, and we'd certainly appreciate if that was, um, if
that was considered, uh, for the final bill.
Um, and, um, that's pretty much it.
So I'm more than happy to take any questions.
Thank you. We've got, uh, a couple of minutes.
Uh, um, I'll hand over to Andy Foster,
who sounds great on mute.
I'd love this more often, but you
may need to unmute this time.
I do it this time. Uh,
but thank you very much, um, Richard,
for the work that you're, you're doing.
Um, two quick questions if I can.
Um, the relationship with council sounds like it's good.
Is it consistent across the board that everybody sort
of is aware you're there and, um,
and able and willing to reach out?
It is becoming more consistent.
I think one of our challenges as a, as I say,
is a fully volunteer organization without staff is just the
capacity to engage with councils.
So more often than not that engagement happens
when an event occurs.
We can sort of arrive and say, look, this is
who we are, this is how we can help.
Do, do you need require assistance?
Obviously we would love to be able to do that beforehand,
but yeah, it's a capacity thing at this stage. Yeah.
And your ability to be able to get people
to emergency situations, I mean,
obviously you're gonna have a range
of different skills around the country.
Um, if you've got a a an emergency situation in any given
part of the country, how do you get around getting people
to those situations and how is that paid for?
Um, great question. Uh, so just the way we work,
if an event takes place, we deploy a, um,
a small assessment team.
We'd go and just assess, you know, engage with, with Council
of defense, um, local groups, assess whether we can support,
um, if they decide that we can support,
we'll then work up a, a full deployment.
Uh, we have vehicles across the country
or number of vehicles that MITs suspicious supply.
So, um, we can get people there by road moves.
Um, but then we also fly in skilled vol.
You know, if we need chainsaw operators up in Northland
and we have them down in Canterbury, we'll fly them up.
Um, and then we, that's the other challenge that we have.
Every time this event, we then have to go
and seek funding to deploy.
So we could be on the ground a lot quicker if we had access
to funding to allow that to happen.
But it's usually a case of, you know, regional trust,
for example, and great rural support.
Trust has been great. It does happen quite quickly,
but it certainly could be quicker
if we had access to those funds.
And so we've had, we've certainly had a number
of submitters who've talked about the ability to be able
to be confident that they're going to, um, get reimbursement
for costs if they, you know, go and, and provide a service.
That sort of arrangement would help
you by the sounds of it as well.
Yeah, being able to do sort of limited cost recovery for,
for certain, um, for certain things would be,
would be useful knowing that we would be able to claim that,
uh, you know, for, for Gabriel, I think during the, um, the
cost recovery or the, the claims process afterwards,
it was limited to welfare, um, support activities.
Um, so it's quite defined. So I think we, we were able
to claim about 8% of the costs that we spent on, on Gabriel.
So it's, yeah, just having that, um, that,
that definition there so we know what we can, um,
can claim against if that arrangement was in place. Thank
You. Sorry. Thank you.
Oh
Yeah, sorry, we are out of time there.
Um, just we, we've got a full agenda,
but, um, Richard, we appreciate you
and thank you Richard team too.
You're, you're an outstanding organization, so thank you,
um, and appreciate your submission today.
Uh, we are gonna move to Claire,
who I believe is here on behalf of te um,
the special interest group for set.
And I'm just waiting to see, oh, hello Claire. Welcome.
Um, uh, we've got 10 minutes for you.
I'll let you know when there's one or two minutes to run,
but you might like to leave some time for questions.
All yours.
Great. Thank you. Um, ua, thank you for the opportunity
to submit our views and to be heard today.
My name is Claire Brown
and I'm the manager for West Coast Emergency Management.
I'm here today as a convener of the TE
KAA Special Interest Group, um, made up
of the 16 emergency management group managers
from across each regional
and unitary council across the country.
I'll be talking to our joint 40 page submission.
I want to acknowledge my colleagues who have contributed
to several workshops over December, January,
and February to collaborate on this combined submission.
And I also want to acknowledge those
who are still in recovery phase to several significant
and devastating events since the start of 2026,
and whose priorities are focused on the here
and now of response.
And recco and recovery
benefit from the collaboration of our 16 group managers is
that others can lean in when our colleagues are at the helm
in response and transition to recovery
combined, we are a group of 16 subject matter experts
who lead emergency management professionals across the
regions combined.
We have a wealth of hands-on experience in the
matters set out in the bill.
This is our everyday bread and butter.
We feel strongly about making every effort
and opportunity to improve emergency management.
Our 40 page submission is testament to the breadth
and feeling and the level of detail
and understanding that must be considered in the bill.
Um, we are pleased
to see this bill has come into an enactment.
Finally, it has been nearly 10 years since the 20 16 17
technical Advisory Group report following the Kaiko
earthquake and tsunami in 2016
and Port Hill Fires in 2017,
and then again in the 2023 ministerial inquiry into the
North Island severe weather events.
Excuse me. There has been a long period of policy
and legislative consideration throughout how we,
we remain within an emergency management system
that struggles to meet the needs of our communities.
I will leave the details to our written submission,
however, there are a number of points I'd like
to draw your attention to.
Firstly, there are several areas in the bill
that we are in support of.
We support the bills focus on social, economic, cultural,
and environmental wellbeing and safety of the public
and the all hazards end-to-end risk management approach.
Secondly, we support
how the bill clarifies roles at a national, regional,
and local level strengthens national leadership
and introduces enforceable minimum standards.
And thirdly, we also support the Bills aim
to enhance the role of communities in Iwi
Maori in emergency management.
However, we believe it should go further
to promote community participation
and reflect the crown's obligations under tei.
There are a number of areas that we share strong concerns,
um, and I'll just go through those, um, key areas.
The bill identifies an additional 82.8 million cost
for councils over four years without proposing
mitigation measures,
which poses significant financial challenges
for local governments,
especially smaller unitary authorities.
Adequate resourcing is critical for the success
of the emergency management system improvement program.
We recommend co-funding for risk reduction,
preparedness planning, hazard data modeling
and recovery capability development.
With regards community engagement,
we believe the build does not sufficiently address the need
for system level change to put communities at the center
of emergency management.
Instead, we advocate for a bottom up redesign
of the emergency management system
to prioritize community resilience.
Our submission supports mandatory iwi Maori representation
on emergency management committees
and suggests that local iwi and hapu should have discretion
and determining governance arrangements
and recovery.
The bill lacks clarity on recovery coordination, especially
for large gale disasters.
We propose amendments
to include recovery coordination arrangements
and regional emergency management plans,
and the introduction of recovery transfer, transfer notices
for post-transition period activities.
Um, and those suggestions are set out in page
38 of our submission.
There are final three areas of concern I'd like to note.
Firstly, the definition
of essential infrastructure providers should be expanded
to include entities such as flood control
and protection services, digital services, grocery
distribution, and hazard warning systems.
The second point refers to civil liability protections.
The bill should address liability protection
for individuals acting in good faith
during undeclared emergencies
and clarify cost recovery for unauthorized actions.
And finally, our submission supports the use of regulations
and rules, but emphasizes the need for robust consultation
with emergency management committees
to ensure local flexibility
and avoid unintended consequences.
Um, before I close, I'd like just to make two further points
regarding unitary auth authorities and implementation.
With regards the different implications
for regional versus unitary councils,
the five small unitary authorities do not have this gale
of Auckland and face materially different affordability
and implementation risks as groups.
They do not have the ability
to distribute costs across multiple councils while they are
among the most exposed to severe weather events.
These factors pose significant implications
for equity rates, impacts and system sustainability.
And before I close, I'd just like
to make a note about implementation.
We acknowledge the effectiveness
of the bill is contingent on phased
and resourced implementation.
The implementation plan must involve collaboration
between local and central government
and address the financial
and capacity challenges faced by councils.
A strong bill is only part of the solution.
In closing, thank you for the opportunity to contribute
to the emergency management bill.
We emphasize the importance of adequate resourcing,
community involvement,
and clear implementation guidelines to ensure the success
of the proposed reforms.
Thank you.
Thank you very much, Claire.
We're we're pretty much out of time,
but I'll just see if there are any questions.
No, I think we are. Okay.
Thank you for your, um, submission
and for speaking on behalf of the group
and all those, um, controllers across the country.
So, uh, we appreciate you taking the time today.
Um, with that for members, we are going
to have a short break and we will be back at 10 50.
Um, I've lost Andy, but he will be back and join us.
And just a reminder that from 11,
Lydia is going to take the chair.
I.